# Privacy as a Property Right: What's in the Bundle

* In response, I suggest that the understanding of property as a bundle of interests rather than despotic dominion over a thing helps frame a viable system of rights with respect to personal data. Moreover, these property interests are to be shaped through legal attention to five areas: inalienabilities, defaults, a right of exit, damages, and institutions. A key element of this model is the employment of use-transferability restrictions in conjunction with an opt-in default. This Article calls this model “hybrid inalienability” because it allows individuals to share, as well as to place limitations on, the future use of their personal information. The proposed hybrid inalienability follows personal information through downstream transfers and limits the negative effects that result from “one-shot” permission to all personal data trade.

* Inalienabilities.--Propertized personal information requires the creation of inalienabilities to respond to the problems of market failure and to address the need for a privacy commons. According to Susan Rose-Ackerman's definition, an “inalienability” is “any restriction on the transferability, ownership, or use of an entitlement.”

*  Defaults.--This Article has discussed how a variety of devices and systems that commodify information give rise to additional uses and transfers of personal data. To limit the negative results of one-shot permission for data trade, it has proposed a combined use-transfer. This Article supports the use of defaults as a further safeguard to promote individual choice. This Article prefers an opt-in default because it would be information-forcing--that is, it would place pressure on the better-informed party to disclose material information about how personal data will be used. This default promises to force the disclosure of hidden information about data-processing practices. Furthermore, this Article advocates that such a default should generally be mandatory to further encourage disclosure--that is, the law should bar parties from bargaining out of the default rule.

* Right of Exit.--Consent to data trade should imply not only an initial opportunity to refuse trade, but also a later chance to exit from an agreement to trade. According to Hanoch Dagan and Michael Heller, “[e]xit stands for the right to withdraw or refuse to engage: the ability to dissociate, to cut oneself out of a relationship with other persons.”250 Providing a chance to withdraw is important because current standards afford little protection to privacy. Once companies are able to establish a low level of privacy as a dominant practice, individuals may face intractable collective action problems in making their wishes heard. As a consequence, an information privacy entitlement should include a right of exit from data trades. 

* Damages.--In the classic methodology of Guido Calabresi and Douglas Melamed, “property rules” are enforced by the subjective valuations of a party and injunctions for specific performance.254 In Property Rules, Liability Rules, and Inalienability: One View of the Cathedral, Calabresi and Melamed argue that in a property regime “the value of the entitlement is agreed upon by the seller.”255 They  *2108 contrast this approach with a state determination of damages, which they associate with a “liability rule.”

* Institutions.--Institutions shape the legal and social structure in which property is necessarily embedded. Just as Carol Rose speaks of property as “the most profoundly sociable of human institutions,”271 it is also an institution that depends on other entities for its shape and maintenance. For example, intellectual property has been fostered by the performing rights societies such as the American Society of Composers, Authors, and Publishers (ASCAP) and Broadcast Music, Inc. (BMI).272 These organizations license performance rights in nondramatic musical compositions and distribute royalties to artists.273 Automobiles are another form of property that is structured by legal obligations; they require title recordings, annual safety inspections, and, depending on the state, different mandatory insurance policies.274These requirements in turn create a dynamic of institution-building--in the automobile example, a mixture of public and private entities has been created to record title, inspect motor vehicles, and underwrite insurance. As for institutions that manage intellectual property, a court has discussed how ASCAP “maintains a surveillance system of radio and television broadcasts to detect unlicensed uses, institutes infringement actions, collects revenues from licensees and distributes royalties to copyright owners in accordance with a schedule that reflects the nature and amount of the use of their music and other factors.”275 ASCAP and BMI also employ “field agents” who monitor local entertainment establishments for unauthorized use of their members' compositions.276What role should institutions play as part of a system of propertized personal data? Institutions are needed for three general purposes: to provide trading mechanisms (a “market-making” function), to verify claims to propertized personal data (a verification function), and to police compliance with agreed-upon terms and legislatively mandated safeguards (an oversight function). Institutions filling these roles will assist the privacy market by ensuring that processes exist for the exchange of data and for the detection of violations of privacy promises. Such entities can also help construct and maintain the privacy commons--the literature on commons, in fact, notes the need for  *2111 such institutions.277 Consider how different entities police overfishing of the ocean and seek to detect pollution that degrades the environment. Consider also a fascinating recent examination of an everyday public good--parking rights at a curb--in which Richard Epstein discusses how a move away from “bottom-up rules of first possession” requires construction of parking meters or assignment of stickers to neighborhood residents.278 Although not the focus of Epstein's analysis, these approaches also require institutions to ticket parking violations and assign parking stickers.Two additional introductory points can be made regarding institutions. First, this Article's preferred model involves decentralization of both the market-making and the oversight functions whenever possible. Such decentralization should also include private rights of action so that citizens can participate in protecting their own rights. Second, the Federal Trade Commission (FTC) already plays an important role in privacy protection, and its activities indicate the importance both of the policing of privacy promises and of decentralized institutional infrastructures.As to the first role of institutions, the “market-making” function is best handled through different centers for information exchange. In contrast to this view, Kenneth Laudon has proposed the establishment of a National Information Market (NIM).279 In the NIM, “[i]ndividuals would establish information accounts and deposit their information assets and informational rights in a local information bank, which could be any local financial institution interested in moving into the information business.”280 These institutions would pool information assets and sell them in “baskets” on a National Information Exchange.281 They would also allocate the resulting compensation, minus a charge for their services, to the individuals whose information comprises a given basket.282The NIM would be a centralized market for propertized personal data. This vision necessitates a single institutional infrastructure that would permit “personal information to be bought and sold, conferring on the seller the right to determine how much information is divulged.”283 Unfortunately, this single market might also encourage  *2112 privacy violations because its centralized nature makes it an easy target for attacks. In response to the possibility of cheating and other abuse, Laudon calls for development of “National Information Accounts (NIAs) for suppliers (individuals and institutions) and buyers (information brokers, individuals, and institutions).”284 He writes: “Every participating citizen would be assigned an NIA with a unique identifier number and barcode symbol.”285 In contrast, this Article calls for verification of propertized personal information through an association with nonpersonal metadata. This metadata might contain information such as the database from which the personal information originated, whether any privacy legislation covered that information, and the existence of any restrictions on further data exchange without permission from the individual to whom the data referred.286 Such a decentralized approach would avoid the possibility of a major privacy meltdown due to the unique identifiers associated with a single NIA. Decentralized data markets also have the potential to develop privacy-friendly innovations in discrete submarkets. Given the novelty of an institutionalized data trade, it makes sense to start with multiple small markets that can draw on local knowledge rather than with Laudon's single NIM.287

Source: Paul M. Schwartz, Property, Privacy, and Personal Data, 117 Harv. L. Rev. 2055, 2110-12 (2004)

# Illustrating the Bundle of Rights on a Spectrum?

* Data characteristics
* Disclosure scenarios
* Information lifecycle
* Analytic Results
* Analytic Results Lifecycle
* Stakeholders
* Current Approaches

Source: https://docs.google.com/document/d/1LvJ2ecUgVSZiTAiiBB4oKlUVlwf9l1F4MdoCFPYw27s/edit

# Filling the "Institution" Gap:  
* public trust companies? 
* alternatives for the institution gap in the form of personal data stores? 
